[test/doc] make NixlConnector example more clear (#24249)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/features/nixl_connector_usage.md

# NixlConnector Usage Guide

NixlConnector is a high-performance KV cache transfer connector for vLLM's disaggregated prefilling feature. It provides fully asynchronous send/receive operations using the NIXL library for efficient cross-process KV cache transfer.

## Prerequisites

### Installation

Install the NIXL library:

> - Refer to [NIXL official repository](https://github.com/ai-dynamo/nixl) for installation instructions

Reviewer: we just switched to `uv pip install nixl` in our build (check Dockerfile), I think we can safely suggest that and refer to the page for building from source instructions.

> - The required NIXL version can be found in [requirements/kv_connectors.txt](../../requirements/kv_connectors.txt) and other relevant config files

Reviewer: as per above

### Transport Configuration

NixlConnector uses NIXL library for underlying communication, which supports multiple transport backends. UCX (Unified Communication X) is the primary default transport library used by NIXL. Configure transport environment variables:

```bash
# Example UCX configuration, adjust according to your enviroment

> export UCX_TLS=all  # or specify specific transports like "rc,ud,sm"

Reviewer: not sure if overloading with info but you can also exclude transports with
`export UCX_TLS=^cuda_ipc`

Author: good:-)

```bash
# 1st GPU as prefiller
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 \
UCX_NET_DEVICES=all \
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT=5600 \
vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B \
  --port 8100 \
  --enforce-eager \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_both"}'
```

### Consumer (Decoder) Configuration

Start a decoder instance that consumes KV caches:

```bash
# 2nd GPU as decoder
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=1 \
UCX_NET_DEVICES=all \
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT=5601 \
vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B \
  --port 8200 \
  --enforce-eager \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_both"}'
```

### Proxy Server

Use a proxy server to route requests between prefiller and decoder:

```bash
python tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/toy_proxy_server.py \
  --port 8192 \
  --prefiller-hosts localhost \
  --prefiller-ports 8100 \
  --decoder-hosts localhost \
  --decoder-ports 8200
```

## Environment Variables

- `VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT`: Port for NIXL handshake communication
    - Default: 5600
    - **Required for both prefiller and decoder instances**
    - Each vLLM worker needs a unique port on its host; using the same port number across different hosts is fine

>     - For TP/DP setups: base_port + dp_rank * tp_size

Reviewer: yeah we should really highlight that in reality it is getting ports in a range starting from `VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT`  for dp/tp

Author: ok

    - Used for initial connection establishment between prefiller and decoder

- `VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_HOST`: Host for side channel communication
    - Default: "localhost"
    - Set when prefiller and decoder are on different machines
    - Connection info is passed via KVTransferParams from prefiller to decoder for handshake

> - `VLLM_NIXL_ABORT_REQUEST_TIMEOUT`: Timeout for request abortion (seconds) (optional)

Reviewer: this is for request abortion on Prefilled KV caches (st if connection is aborted before D reads, kv cache blocks on P are not held on indefinitely)

Author: thanks

  --tensor-parallel-size 8 \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_producer"}'
```

### Multiple Decoder Instances on Different Machines

```bash
# Decoder 1 on Machine C (example IP: ${IP3})
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_HOST=${IP3} \
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT=5600 \
UCX_NET_DEVICES=all \
vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --port 8000 \
  --tensor-parallel-size 8 \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_consumer"}'

# Decoder 2 on Machine D (example IP: ${IP4})
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_HOST=${IP4} \
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT=5600 \
UCX_NET_DEVICES=all \
vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --port 8000 \
  --tensor-parallel-size 8 \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_consumer"}'
```

### Proxy for Multiple Instances

```bash
python tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/toy_proxy_server.py \
  --port 8192 \
  --prefiller-hosts ${IP1} ${IP2} \
  --prefiller-ports 8000 8000 \
  --decoder-hosts ${IP3} ${IP4} \
  --decoder-ports 8000 8000
```

### KV Role Options

- **kv_producer**: For prefiller instances that generate KV caches
- **kv_consumer**: For decoder instances that consume KV caches from prefiller

> - **kv_both**: Enables symmetric functionality where the connector can act as both producer and consumer. This provides flexibility for experimental setups and scenarios where the role distinction is not predetermined.

Reviewer: it doesn't really matter as the connector is not honoring the role, it all depends on the request being received from the router.
I wouldn't want users to think this is something that is affecting the deployment.

Author: Hi, @NickLucche   @chaunceyjiang 

 
When I careful reviewed NixlConnector code, I found it seems not care about kv-role !!
and the `toy_proxy_server.py` also does not respect the role( `--prefiller-host` / `--decoder-host`).
so the `kv_role` is NOT honoring anywhere for `NixlConnector`!!

I will keep the role explanation for new comer, but adding notes to tell people about above "confusion" or "limitation" (whatever we call it ^_^)

--- 
my own story:
previously , I saw the kv-role does matter for `p2p_nccl_connector.py`) I think there's confusion P2PConnector handles `kv-both`)
And `kv-both` at least give me the impression that it's not for production but experiment.(although it can be quite flexible to switching role in flight without reboot vLLM).
Am I right ?

# NixlConnector Usage Guide

NixlConnector is a high-performance KV cache transfer connector for vLLM's disaggregated prefilling feature. It provides fully asynchronous send/receive operations using the NIXL library for efficient cross-process KV cache transfer.

## Prerequisites

### Installation

Install the NIXL library:

- Refer to [NIXL official repository](https://github.com/ai-dynamo/nixl) for installation instructions
- The required NIXL version can be found in `requirements/kv_connectors.txt` and other relevant config files

### Transport Configuration

NixlConnector uses NIXL library for underlying communication, which supports multiple transport backends. UCX (Unified Communication X) is the primary default transport library used by NIXL. Configure transport environment variables:

```bash
# Example UCX configuration, adjust according to your enviroment
export UCX_TLS=all  # or specify specific transports like "rc,ud,sm"
export UCX_NET_DEVICES=all  # or specify network devices like "mlx5_0:1"
```

> **Note**: When using UCX as the transport backend, NCCL environment variables (like `NCCL_IB_HCA`, `NCCL_SOCKET_IFNAME`) are not applicable to NixlConnector, so configure UCX-specific environment variables instead of NCCL variables.

Reviewer 2: To render nicely in the docs

```suggestion
!!! tode
    When using UCX as the transport backend, NCCL environment variables (like `NCCL_IB_HCA`, `NCCL_SOCKET_IFNAME`) are not applicable to NixlConnector, so configure UCX-specific environment variables instead of NCCL variables.
```

# Decoder 2 on Machine D (example IP: ${IP4})
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_HOST=${IP4} \
VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT=5600 \
UCX_NET_DEVICES=all \
vllm serve Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B --port 8000 \
  --tensor-parallel-size 8 \
  --kv-transfer-config '{"kv_connector":"NixlConnector","kv_role":"kv_consumer"}'
```

### Proxy for Multiple Instances

```bash
python tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/toy_proxy_server.py \
  --port 8192 \
  --prefiller-hosts ${IP1} ${IP2} \
  --prefiller-ports 8000 8000 \
  --decoder-hosts ${IP3} ${IP4} \
  --decoder-ports 8000 8000
```

### KV Role Options

- **kv_producer**: For prefiller instances that generate KV caches
- **kv_consumer**: For decoder instances that consume KV caches from prefiller
- **kv_both**: Enables symmetric functionality where the connector can act as both producer and consumer. This provides flexibility for experimental setups and scenarios where the role distinction is not predetermined.

## Example Scripts/Code

Refer to these example scripts in the vLLM repository:

- `tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/run_accuracy_test.sh`
- `tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/toy_proxy_server.py`

> - `tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/test_accuracy.py`

Reviewer 2: If you use `<gh-file:xxx>` the docs will render a nice URL that takes the user to the relevant place on GitHub

```

### Proxy Server

Use a proxy server to route requests between prefiller and decoder:

```bash
python tests/v1/kv_connector/nixl_integration/toy_proxy_server.py \
  --port 8192 \
  --prefiller-hosts localhost \
  --prefiller-ports 8100 \
  --decoder-hosts localhost \
  --decoder-ports 8200
```

## Environment Variables

- `VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_PORT`: Port for NIXL handshake communication
    - Default: 5600
    - **Required for both prefiller and decoder instances**
    - Each vLLM worker needs a unique port on its host; using the same port number across different hosts is fine
    - For TP/DP deployments, each worker's port on a node is computed as: base_port + dp_rank * tp_size + tp_rank (e.g., with `--tensor-parallel-size=4` and base_port=5600, tp_rank 0..3 use ports 5600, 5601, 5602, 5603 on that node).
    - Used for the initial NIXL handshake between the prefiller and the decoder

- `VLLM_NIXL_SIDE_CHANNEL_HOST`: Host for side channel communication
    - Default: "localhost"
    - Set when prefiller and decoder are on different machines
    - Connection info is passed via KVTransferParams from prefiller to decoder for handshake

> - `VLLM_NIXL_ABORT_REQUEST_TIMEOUT`: Auto-release timeout for prefiller's KV cache when decoder unresponsive (seconds) (optional)
>     - When nixl connection is aborted, before decoder reads kv-cache blocks through nixl channel, after this timeout value, prefill will release its kv cache blocks, to avoid holding them indefinitely.
>     - Default: 120

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- VLLM_NIXL_ABORT_REQUEST_TIMEOUT:
Timeout (in seconds) for automatically releasing the prefiller’s KV cache for a particular request. (Optional)

  - If a request is aborted and the decoder has not yet read the KV-cache blocks through the nixl channel, the prefill instance will release its KV-cache blocks after this timeout to avoid holding them indefinitely.
  - Default: 120
```
